Before I begin this review, I have a confession to make. After Episode 18 had aired, I felt honored as my home country was mentioned in the anime while also slightly amused by the idea the author included it. Hearing 2 different VAs having a vacation in a different country other than the usually portrayed countries like the US, Italy, France, or anything else is weirdly soothing. And yes, this is where I admit that I am a Malaysian. Witness the honored one.

It's been difficult to approach Jujutsu Kaisen Season 2 with an objective mind, given how it was produced with extremely tight scheduling (only a week before the episode had to be aired!), and the studio's reluctance to pay its staff fairly. When MAPPA's working schedule is this bad, it's almost impossible to fathom how something like Jujutsu Kaisen could still look so good, despite the simplified look and some awkward drawings during action sequences. The staff had to give 120% of their potential to push out the episode for us, devoted fans of Jujutsu Kaisen, and to satisfy the company's greed for mainstream attention. At this point, it's hard to determine which approach is appropriate, as praising it would justify the decision MAPPA executives made and later encourage more situations like this for its staff, while criticizing it would discredit the effort of the staff, later proven by the cultural impact and media edits fans have posted for this season.

The two arcs this season adapts, Gojo's Past Arc and the infamous Shibuya Incident Arc that had many leaks and spoilers from manga fans; were surprisingly handled pretty well for something that was rushed. Well, since the Shibuya Incident Arc took a delay after Episode 5 aired, and for as little time they made to create 18 episodes fully compassing it, it did not disappoint, to say the least. The magnitude of the fights JJK is known for has multiplied further. Not to mention, we see some of the best voice acting to compete for 2023. Honestly, it was difficult to choose who had the best voice performance between Enoki Junya and Shimazaki Nobunaga, since they put their heart and soul into their roles, not to forget about Gojo's VA though. Truly the perfect example of everyone using 120% of their potential.

If there's any actual criticism I could give for this anime, it's the storytelling. While the set pieces are pulled off really well, it's at the cost of some brainless plot conveniences. While the action sequences and the payoffs are great, the story's logic is idiosyncratic, like the previous season. It takes plenty of time to elaborate the power system and techniques used by different people alike, but then allows some characters to ignore that logic and then proceed to explain it in the most general way possible as if it would accomplish anything. This kind of shenanigans can be a real pain in the head for people who are looking for actual grounded shows. The author follows the system until they say that something needs to happen regardless of the outcome. Well, it just means you're going to see some plot armor here and there.

Other than that, feast your eyes on some of the most action-packed sequences we have gotten this year. There are still some legitimate criticisms with people claiming the animation looks like fan art (they're not wrong, sometimes the art does look rough and unpolished), but the cinematography and choreography do not miss. It's so fluid that the impact of each of their force is properly registered and does not feel awkward (well, excluding a few scenes that took shortcuts like Episode 17). Taking into consideration the intensity and stakes this series has introduced further, the payoff is immensely satisfying, even greater than JJK Season 1's action sequences.

To summarize, Jujutsu Kaisen Season 2 is a product of great talent that has been stretched thin by tight deadlines. We might never see a sequel of Jujutsu Kaisen that reaches this level of quality ever again, due to staff leaving MAPPA and never to be associated with it ever again. To me, it seems like the swan song of MAPPA's glory, as it all finally crumbles down for the people to see what lies beneath their facade.
Reviewer’s Rating: 10